

--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:2507.03405v1  [cs.SE]  4 Jul 2025
Prompt Engineering Guidelines for Using Large
Language Models in Requirements Engineering
Krishna Ronanki1,2[0009−0001−8242−6771], Simon Arvidsson*1,2, and Johan
Axell*1,2
⋆
1 Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
2 University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Abstract. The rapid emergence of generative AI models like Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) has demonstrated its utility across various ac-
tivities, including within Requirements Engineering (RE). Ensuring the
quality and accuracy of LLM-generated output is critical, with prompt
engineering serving as a key technique to guide model responses. How-
ever, existing literature provides limited guidance on how prompt en-
gineering can be leveraged, specifically for RE activities. The objective
of this study is to explore the applicability of existing prompt engineer-
ing guidelines for the effective usage of LLMs within RE. To achieve this
goal, we began by conducting a systematic review of primary literature to
compile a non-exhaustive list of prompt engineering guidelines. Then, we
conducted interviews with RE experts to present the extracted guidelines
and gain insights on the advantages and limitations of their application
within RE. Our literature review indicates a shortage of prompt engi-
neering guidelines for domain-specific activities, specifically for RE. Our
proposed mapping contributes to addressing this shortage. We conclude
our study by identifying an important future line of research within this
field.
Keywords: Requirements Engineering · Generative AI · Large Lan-
guage Models · Prompt Engineering · Guidelines.
1 Introduction
The development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques such as Natural Lan-
guageProcessing(NLP),MachineLearning(ML)andDeepLearning(DL)meth-
ods for various requirements engineering (RE) activities, including requirements
classification, prioritisation, tracing, ambiguity detection, and modelling has
been increasing Alhoshan et al. [2023b], Zhao, Liping and Alhoshan, Waad and
Ferrari, Alessio and Letsholo, Keletso J and Ajagbe, Muideen A and Chioasca,
Erol-Valeriu and Batista-Navarro, Riza T [2021]. It has been empirically ob-
served that natural language is the most commonly used medium for drafting
⋆ These authors contributed equally to this work.

--- Page 2 ---
2 Ronanki et al.
requirements in the industrial context. This significant synergy between natu-
ral language and requirements has led to the emergence of NLP in the field of
RE Zhao, Liping and Alhoshan, Waad and Ferrari, Alessio and Letsholo, Keletso
J and Ajagbe, Muideen A and Chioasca, Erol-Valeriu and Batista-Navarro, Riza
T [2021]. Despite the advancements in NLP for RE, there is a noticeable lack
in the application of natural language generation (NLG)-based method in sup-
port of RE activities Zhao, Liping and Alhoshan, Waad and Ferrari, Alessio
and Letsholo, Keletso J and Ajagbe, Muideen A and Chioasca, Erol-Valeriu and
Batista-Navarro, Riza T [2021]. Moreover, the majority of existing state-of-the-
art approaches for supporting RE activities and processes rely on ML/DL. These
methods necessitate substantial amounts of task-specific labelled training data.
One potential solution to overcome the need of large quantities of high qual-
ity labelled training data and advance NLG within RE is using pre-trained
generative AI models like Large Language Models (LLM). Utilising LLMs for
performing RE activities can potentially remove the need for large amounts of
labelled data. Recent LLMs are demonstrating increasingly impressive capabil-
ities when performing a wide range of tasks Brown, Tom and Mann, Benjamin
and Ryder, Nick and Subbiah, Melanie and Kaplan, Jared D and Dhariwal,
Prafulla and Neelakantan, Arvind and Shyam, Pranav and Sastry, Girish and
Askell, Amanda and others [2020], including their significant enhancements in
NLP tasks Haque, Mubin Ul and Dharmadasa, Isuru and Sworna, Zarrin Tas-
nim and Rajapakse, Roshan Namal and Ahmad, Hussain [2022]. The GPT-3.5
LLM has demonstrated a surprising proficiency in specific technical tasks Choi,
Jonathan H and Hickman, Kristin E and Monahan, Amy and Schwarcz, Daniel
[2023], including RE Alhoshan et al. [2023a].
However, the input prompts to the LLM are observed to significantly impact
the quality of the LLM’s output Vogelsang [2024]. The emerging practice of
utilisingcarefullyselectedandcomposednaturallanguageinstructionstoachieve
a desirable output from an LLM is calledprompt engineering Liu and Chilton
[2022a]. Prompt engineering plays a crucial role as the selection of prompts can
have a significant impact on downstream tasks Perez et al. [2021]. However, there
are no guidelines or strategies that RE practitioners can leverage to utilise LLM
effectively.
To address this research gap, we conducted a systematic review of primary
studies to identify and analyse existing prompt engineering guidelines for LLMs
and explore their applicability within RE. By mapping these guidelines to RE
activities, we aim to bridge a gap in the literature and provide a structured
approach for both researchers and practitioners. In order for us to realise these
objectives, the following research questions were formed:
RQ1: What are the existing prompt engineering guidelines for effective use
of LLMs?
RQ2: What are the advantages and the limitations of using these guidelines
for the effective usage of LLMs within RE?
RQ3: What are the relevant prompt engineering guidelines for the effective
usage of LLMs within RE?

--- Page 3 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3
Section 2 present the relevant background literature that motivates our re-
search goals. Section 3 describes our research design and execution. Section 4
presents the results of the our study and answer theRQ1, RQ2 and RQ3. We
discuss the implications of the gathered results along with the threats to valid-
ity of our study in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, we conclude our study and
present potential areas for further research based on the discussed implications.
2 Background and Related Work
Recent research in prompt engineering has proposed guidelines for effective
prompt engineering of generative AI models, particularly LLMs and large vi-
sion models Liu and Chilton [2022b]. The existing research on the development
of prompting techniques for domain-specific tasks such as RE, however, remains
sparse with some generally applicable outcomes provided by White et al. White
et al. [2023a]. The literature on prompt engineering guidelines and approaches
tied specifically to RE remains limited at the time of this study, with only a few
papers partially covering guidelines for tasks and prompt learning within RE
activities.
Rodriguez et al. Rodriguez et al. [2023] explore the process of prompt en-
gineering to extract link predictions from an LLM. They provide detailed in-
sights into their approach for constructing effective prompts and propose mul-
tiple strategies for leveraging LLMs. Their key takeaways include the impact
of minor changes to prompts on the quality of the outputs, the effect of chain-
of-thought reasoning, and the importance of specifying targeted usage to get
desired outcomes. However, this study’s biggest drawback is its limitation to
only one task.
Ronanki et al. Ronanki et al. [2024b] evaluate the effectiveness of 5 of the
prompt patterns’ White et al. [2023c] ability to make GPT-3.5 turbo perform
binary requirements classification and requirements traceability tasks. They also
offer recommendations on which prompt pattern to use for a specific RE task and
provide an evaluation framework as a reference for researchers and practitioners
who want to evaluate different prompt patterns for different RE tasks. The
results of this study are limited to only the two mentioned RE tasks and the five
prompt patterns that were used in the experiments.
Sasaki et al. Sasaki et al. [2024] present a systematic literature review focus-
ing on practical applications of prompt engineering in SE. They identified and
classified prompt engineering patterns, showcasing their application across dif-
ferent SE tasks. They also provide a taxonomy of prompt engineering techniques
for SE that has five categories, eleven sub-categories and twenty one patterns
along with the problems they can applied to and the solution you receive. How-
ever, the prompt engineering patterns covered within the study are from various
SE tasks like code generation, testing, debugging, etc.
The reviewed studies broadly agree that the “context” and “structure” of
prompts significantly impact the quality of generated outputs. However, there
is considerable variation in the recommended approaches for achieving high-

--- Page 4 ---
4 Ronanki et al.
quality results. “Few-shot prompting” has been observed to improve the LLM
output quality compared to alternative methods Chen et al. [2023], West et al.
[2021]. Conversely, other studies highlight cases where few-shot prompting falls
short, suggesting that its effectiveness depends on specific conditions Yu et al.
[2022], Clavié et al. [2023].
Furthermore, research on models like GPT-3, GPT-3.5, and ChatGPT indi-
cates persistent challenges in tasks requiring emotional understanding or mathe-
matical reasoning, regardless of the prompting approach used Yang et al. [2023].
Additionally, these models are prone to confidently generating incorrect facts, a
phenomenon known as hallucinations. Various studies propose mitigation strate-
gies to address these inaccuracies Koralus and Wang-Maścianica [2023]. Recent
studies have also explored applying prompt engineering guidelines to new do-
mains, including SE. These studies often propose domain-specific adaptations
of existing guidelines, expanding the applicability of prompt engineering tech-
niques White et al. [2023a], Yu et al. [2022], Clavié et al. [2023], Chen et al.
[2023], Yang et al. [2023]. These sources, while crucial for shaping and enhanc-
ing our understanding of prompt engineering for LLMs, fail to address the gap
of lack of standard prompt engineering guidelines applicable for RE activities,
further strengthening the motivation of our study.
Through the works of Pressman, R.S. Pressman [2005] and Sommerville,
I. Sommerville and Sawyer [1997], the five main RE activities identified in the
literature are elicitation, analysis, specification, validation, and management.
These activities are crucial for successful product development and face various
challenges. Our mapping of prompt engineering guidelines to RE was done while
focusing primarily on these five activities.
3 Methodology
We conducted a systematic review of primary studies to identify prompt en-
gineering guidelines for LLMs to answerRQ1. Then, we conducted interviews
with three RE experts to gain insights into how the extracted guidelines can be
used to leverage LLMs more effectively during RE activities. These interviews
helped us gain insight into the advantages and limitations of the prompt engi-
neering guidelines, answeringRQ2. Based on the expert’s insights, a mapping of
relevant prompt engineering guidelines to different RE activities was performed
following the thematic synthesis approach Cruzes and Dybå [2011]. This map-
ping, has the potential to help RE practitioners leverage LLMs more effectively,
and answersRQ3.
3.1 Systematic Review of Primary Studies
Webasedoursystematicreviewprocesspartiallyontheguidelinesforconducting
a systematic literature review Kitchenham and Charters [2007]. To construct a
comprehensive search strategy, we identified relevant keywords through prior
research in related domains and a snowballing approach. Based on our research

--- Page 5 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5
objectives and questions, we formulated the following search string: (“Prompt
Engineering” OR “Prompt Patterns” OR “Prompt Design” OR “Prompt Catalog”
OR “Prompt Guidelines”) AND (“Large Language Models” OR “Generative AI”).
During the initial exploration, we observed inconsistencies in terminology across
studies. Consequently, we expanded the search string to improve coverage. The
string was then adapted to match the interface requirements of each database
while preserving the original keywords.
We restricted our search to papers published from 2018 onward, as this marks
the introduction of transformer architectures with OpenAI’s Generative Pre-
trained Transformer (GPT) and Google’s Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers (BERT) Vaswani et al. [2017], Devlin et al. [2018], Radford
et al. [2018]. This time frame constraint also helps ensure relevancy and state-of-
the-art within the field of prompt engineering to match the rapid development
of large generative models.
Our review covered five databases: ACM, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDi-
rect, and arXiv. The first four were selected due to their extensive coverage and
credibilityincomputerscienceandsoftwareengineeringresearch.arXivwaslater
included to capture emerging studies, given the field’s fast-paced development.
To identify relevant primary studies for this systematic review, we applied
inclusion and exclusion criteria, as detailed in Table 1. Each study was initially
assessed based on its title, abstract, introduction, conclusion, and keywords. If
ambiguity remained after this stage, a full-text review was conducted to deter-
mine its relevance. Applying the search string to the selected databases yielded
271 studies for initial screening. After evaluating them against the inclusion
and exclusion criteria presented in Table 1 and removing duplicates, 28 studies
(10.3%) were identified as primary studies.
Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria
Written in English language Papers with sections or content
in languages other than English
Date of publication from 2018 Published prior to 2018
Emphasises generative AI models Unrelated to generative AI models
Focus on Natural language promptsEmphasis on model tuning
Relevant to RQ1 Does not contain prompt engineering guidelines
T able 1.Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the review.
In order to conduct extraction of relevant data, the form depicted in Ta-
ble 2 was used. This form was established in order to ensure an organised as
well as standardised data collection process. It also facilitated the process of
distinguishing relevant data for our research question.

--- Page 6 ---
6 Ronanki et al.
Data Description Relevant RQ
Year To ensure temporal relevance of the extracted prompt
engineering guidelines
General
Model Type Text-to-image and text-to-text. RQ1
Prompt MethodWhat prompt engineering techniques were studied?RQ1
Guidelines What guidelines are presented? RQ1
Findings Strengths or limitations of the guidelines presentedRQ1
T able 2.Data extraction form
3.2 Interviews: Data Collection and Analysis
To assess the advantages and limitations of the identified prompt engineering
guidelines and gain insights on which guidelines are relevant for the activities
involved within the selected RE phases, we conducted semi-structured inter-
views Robson, Colin [1993] with three experts from different academic institu-
tions, each specialising in distinct areas of RE. The primary selection criterion
was expertise in RE, with additional consideration given to knowledge in AI4RE
and related fields. Experts were identified based on their academic background
and publication history. While our study focuses on RE, the selected experts pro-
vided diverse perspectives, spanning fields such as RE4AI and NLP4RE as well.
Experts were contacted via email with an introduction to the study and details
on the interview process. All interviews were conducted online via Zoom, each
lasting approximately 30 minutes. We ensured all the interviews were conducted
by following the ethical interview checklist presented by P.E. Strandberg Strand-
berg, Per Erik [2019].
We chose qualitative content analysis Drisko and Maschi [2016] to extract in-
sights from the qualitative data collected from the interviews. The transcripts of
the interviews were edited, validated through member checking [Seaman, C.B.,
1999], and anonymised before we performed content analysis. We then conducted
a thematic synthesis to map the relevant prompt engineering guidelines to dif-
ferent activities within the selected RE phases. Our thematic synthesis approach
was inspired by Cruzes and Dybå Cruzes and Dybå [2011], involved summaris-
ing, integrating, and comparing findings on a specific topic to generate new
insights, such as theories, frameworks, or conclusions. The final mapping was
developed by integrating the insights provided by the RE experts for mapping
of the guidelines to the RE activities.
4 Results
The results of this study are presented in three subsections, each corresponding
to an RQ. Subsection 4.1 addressesRQ1, presenting a non-exhaustive list of
prompt engineering guidelines. These guidelines are categorised into the nine
most frequently occurring themes identified in our review. Subsection 4.2 ex-
plores the advantages and limitations of applying the identified prompt engi-
neering guidelines in RE based on expert interviews, providing insights neces-

--- Page 7 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7
sary for answeringRQ2. Subsection 4.3 answersRQ3by mapping the identified
guidelines to relevant RE activities.
4.1 Prompt Engineering Guidelines
From the 28 included primary studies, we identified and extracted 36 prompt en-
gineering guidelines. These guidelines were categorised into nine distinct themes
based on their defining characteristics. Each theme was defined to capture the
underlying concepts and group similar guidelines, providing a clearer overview
of their overall intent and purpose.
Context The “Context” theme revolves around guidelines that relate to con-
textual information in any manner for prompts.
Persona The “Persona” theme is a high-level abstraction of guidelines that
revolves around strategies for LLMs to take on specific or different perspectives
on specified tasks by using prompts. Persona in this instance can be compared
to perspectives or points of view.
Templates The “Templates” theme encapsulates guidelines that only provide
an explicit structure of prompts, known as a template.
Disambiguation The “Disambiguation” theme refers to guidelines that aim to
address ambiguity, clarification, or understanding of intent.
Reasoning The “Reasoning” theme captures guidelines that aim to affect rea-
soning capabilities or the ability to think through complex problems or tasks in
a generated output.
Analysis The theme “Analysis” revolve around guidelines examining, evaluat-
ing, or analysing information or tasks.
Keywords The theme “Keywords” represent guidelines that involve any use of
single-word modifiers to prompts.
Wording The theme “Wording” refers to guidelines that relate to choices of
words, text formatting, writing styles, or inclusion and exclusion of text.

--- Page 8 ---
8 Ronanki et al.
Fig. 1. Theme distribution of the extracted guidelines from the studies in the review.
Few-shot PromptsThe theme “Few-shot Prompts” categorises guidelines that
are intended for any form of few-shot prompting.
Each guideline was assigned to one of the nine themes and given a unique
identifier, as listed in Table 3. This categorisation provides insight into the most
common types of guidelines found in the literature. As shown in Fig. 1, the “Con-
text” themeconsistsofthehighestnumberofguidelines,followedby“Reasoning”,
“Wording”, and“Few-shot Prompts” themes. The “Persona” theme had the lowest
number of guidelines, with only 2. To reference specific guidelines in this paper,
we use a combination of the theme’s initial letter and the guideline’s identifier.
For example, C1 refers to the first guideline within the “Context” theme.
4.2 Expert Insights: Interview Analysis
Interviews were conducted with three different RE experts, enquiring about their
views on the advantages and the limitations of guidelines from our review and
their possible usage for LLMs within RE activities.
Requirements Elicitation Each of the experts interviewed emphasised the
importance of context in prompts, especially for for requirement elicitation. Re-
garding the advantages, Expert 2 discussed the potential of leveraging contextual
prompts for LLMs in this process, noting that they could encourage creative
requirements exploration. They stated, “It may be creative requirements, like
[for the LLM] to say, hey, have you thought of this? And then a person says,
oh, that’s a good idea, or no, that’s a bad idea.” Expert 3 emphasised that
templates could be beneficial across various prompt-related activities and RE

--- Page 9 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9
Theme Description
Context(C)
1. Adding context to examples in prompts produce more efficient and informative output. Reynoldsand McDonell [2021]2. Provide context to all prompts to avoid output hallucinations. Kumar [2023]3. Provide context of the prompt to ensure a closely related output. Lubiana et al. [2023], Zhou et al.[2022a]4. The more context tokens pre-appended to prompts, the more fine-grained output.Zhou et al. [2022a]5. The Context Manager Pattern enables users to specify or remove context for a conversation withan LLM White et al. [2023b]6. Providing more context and instructions is an effective strategy to increase the semantic quality ofthe output Vogelsang [2024]
Persona(P)
1. Improves the generation quality by conditioning the prompt with an identity, such as “Pythonprogrammer” or “Math tutor” Wei et al. [2023]2. To explore the requirements of a software-reliant system, include:- “I want you to act as the system”,- “Use the requirements to guide your behaviour”White et al. [2023c]
T emplates(T)
1. To improve reasoning and common sense in output, follow a template such as:- “Reason step-by-step for the following problem. [Original prompt inserted here]” Koralus and Wang-Maścianica [2023]2. The following prompt template has shown an impressive quality of AI art:- “[Medium] [Subject] [Artist(s)] [Details] [Image repository support]”Oppenlaender et al. [2023]3. I am going to provide a template for your output; This is the template: PATTERN with PLACE-HOLDERS White et al. [2023b]
Disambi-guation(D)
1. Ensure any areas of potential miscommunication or ambiguity are caught, by providing a detailedscope:- “Within this scope”,- “Consider these requirements or specifications” White et al. [2023c]2. To find points of weakness in a requirements specification, consider including:- “Point out any areas of ambiguity or potentially unintended outcomes” White et al. [2023c]3. The persona prompt method can be used to consider potential ambiguities from different perspec-tives. White et al. [2023a]
Reasoning(R)
1. Prepending “Let’s think step by step” improves zero-shot performance. Zhou et al. [2022b]2. Extending the previously known “Let’s think step by step”, with “to reach the right conclusion,” to highlight decision-making inthe prompt. Clavié et al. [2023]3. Chain Of Thought (CoT) prompting improves LLM performance and factual inconsistency evaluationcompared to Zero-shot.Chen et al. [2023], Luo et al. [2023]4. Tree of thought (ToT) allows LLMs to perform deliberate decision making by considering multiple different reasoning pathsand self-evaluating choices to decide the next course of action Yao et al. [2024]5. The intent of the Cognitive Verifier pattern is to force the LLM to always subdivide questions into additional questions that canbe used to provide a better answer to the original question White et al. [2023b]
Analysis(A)
1. self-consistency boosts the performance of chain-of-thought prompting Wang et al. [2022a]2. The best of three strategy improves the LLM output stability and detecting hallucinations Ronankiet al. [2024a]3. Emotion-enhanced CoT prompting is an effective method to leverage emotional cues to enhancethe ability of ChatGPT onmental health analysis. Yang et al. [2023]
Keywords(K)
1. When picking the prompt, focus on the subject and style keywords instead of connecting words.Liu and Chilton [2022b]2. Pre-appending keywords to prompts are shown to greatly improve performance by providing thelanguage model withappropriate context. Gero et al. [2022]3. Modifiers/Keywords can be added to the details or image repository sections of a template suchas:- “[Medium] [Subject] [Artist(s)] [Details] [Image repository support]” Oppenlaender et al. [2023]4. The inclusion of multiple descriptive keywords tends to align results closer to expectations. Haoet al. [2022]
W ording(W)
1. In translation tasks, adding a newline before the phrase in a new language increases the odds thatthe output sentenceis still English. Reynolds and McDonell [2021]2. A complete sentence definition with stop words performs better as a prompt than a set of coreterms that were extractedfrom the complete sentence definition after removing the stop words. Yong et al. [2022]3. Words such as “well-known” and “often used to explain” are successful for analogy generation.Bhavya et al. [2022]4. Modifying prompts to resemble pseudocode tend to be the most successful in coding tasks. Dennyet al. [2023], White et al. [2023c]5. Prompts to contain explicit algorithmic hints in engineering tasks perform better. Denny et al.[2023]
F ew-shotPrompts(F)
1. Inclusion of “Question:” and “Answer:” improves the response, but rarely gives a binary answer.Trautmann et al. [2022]2. For easier understanding, number examples in few-shot prompting. West et al. [2021]3. The format of [INPUT] and [OUTPUT] should linguistically imply the relationship between them.West et al. [2021]4. Specifications can be added to each [INPUT] and [OUTPUT] pair to give extra insight into com-plicated problems. West et al. [2021]5. In Few-shot prompting include a rationale in each shot (Input-rationale-output). Wang et al.[2022b]
T able 3.Thematic Classification of Prompt Engineering Guidelines

--- Page 10 ---
10 Ronanki et al.
activities where LLMs provide value, specifically mentioning requirements elici-
tation as a key application. They suggested that keyword-based guidelines can
be appropriate for requirements elicitation.
However, the experts also had concerns regarding the effectiveness of term
“context” included in the guidelines, arguing how it could be ambiguous as it is
a quite general word. Expert 3 stated “I would say that context may need to be
decomposed in somehow because otherwise, the guideline may be too generic.”
Expert 1 mentioned that the context that the guidelines refer to may vary de-
pending on assumptions made by different stakeholders. Expert 2 brought up
another limitation, on how the context may not fully cover what the stakeholders
want, stating “So you can use it to elicit requirements, but they’re not necessarily
requirements that anyone wants to implement.”
Requirements Analysis Expert 2 acknowledged a potential advantage in us-
ing LLMs to assess key qualities of requirements, stating, “If you’re asking [the
LLM], ‘Is this maintainable? Is this verifiable? Is this unambiguous?’ then you
could come back and say yes or no, and that might be useful.” They 2 also
suggested that templates could be useful for analysing completeness of require-
ments.
However, they ultimately emphasised the limitations, explaining that the
uncertainty surrounding the output, coupled with a lack of confidence in the
feedback provided by LLMs, would make the results unreliable and of limited
practical value. Expert 1 highlighted a key limitation, noting a lack of confi-
dence in the feedback generated and the inherent uncertainty surrounding it.
They raised concerns about the inconsistencies in LLM-generated outputs, par-
ticularly the variability in responses even when identical prompts are used. They
cautioned against over-reliance on templates in requirements analysis.
Expert 1 also pointed out the difficulty in understanding how an LLM inter-
prets reasoning steps. Similarly, Expert 2 stated, “It is only capturing one very
narrow type of reasoning. If you are trying to get it to reason in a process view,
like step one, step two, step three, I am not even sure that is reasoning.” They
further questioned whether LLMs could effectively support the type of reasoning
required in RE.
Despite these concerns, Expert 3 noted potential advantages, stating, “It
could be useful for the analysis of requirements towards the generation of sys-
tem architecture” They also suggested that embedding prompting guidelines
within LLMs could support automated sub-tasks that aid in requirements anal-
ysis, referencing implementation approaches such as AutoGPT AutoGPT [2025].
Overall, experts agreed that requirements analysis is likely too complex for cur-
rent LLMs to handle effectively. They expressed scepticism about the capability
of existing LLMs to fully support this task given their current state of develop-
ment.
Requirements SpecificationExpert 1 emphasised the potential to iteratively
explore unclear aspects of requirements, stating, “You can explore, maybe even

--- Page 11 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11
iteratively, any unclear aspects of your requirements and, as I say, any ambigu-
ities where there could be potential misunderstanding” They further suggested
that integrating persona-based guidelines could enhance this process by enabling
ambiguity exploration from multiple perspectives. They stressed the importance
of justifications, explaining that there is a need for reasoning behind why a
requirement is deemed ambiguous or weak.
Expert 2 identified a key advantage, noting that “it [LLM] could help to
point out weaknesses in a requirement specification” and that “prompt engi-
neering could help point out ambiguity.” However, they also acknowledged that
ambiguity might not always be a concern, referencing prior studies on smaller
teams where such issues had minimal impact.
Expert 3 exclusively highlighted advantages, emphasising that these guide-
lines could be beneficial not only for requirement specification but also for re-
quirements review. They provided an example related to guideline D2, stating,
“So this is a useful prompt for sure, it’s going to change the way we make re-
quirements reviews.” They further elaborated on the critical role of requirements
reviews, particularly in safety-critical contexts.
Requirements Validation Experts 1 and 3 acknowledged potential advan-
tages of using LLMs for requirements validation. Expert 3 suggested that the use
of LLMs in validation could be a promising area for further research. They pro-
posed that LLMs could assist in validating requirements against the needs of spe-
cific user types, rather than solely acting as the system itself, stating,“Validating
requirements based on the needs of a specific user could be beneficial, instead
of simply acting as the system.” However, they emphasised the necessity of pro-
viding extensive descriptions of the system to the LLM within the prompts as a
potential limitation.
Expert 1 also noted a potential advantage in using LLMs to explore the va-
lidity of specific goals or targets from multiple perspectives. However, they raised
concerns regarding the role of context among different personas. In this context,
context refers to what the personas know about the system, and a key limitation
is determining the appropriate scope of this knowledge. Expert 1 cautioned that
restricting the LLM’s perspective to a specific dimension of the problem could
significantly narrow the scope of validation, making it applicable only to the
predefined perspective. They stated, “If you limit the LLM only to look from a
certain dimension or certain perspective on the problem, then you scope down
your validation a lot to be only valid for that certain perspective that you define
beforehand.” They also acknowledged a key advantage of templates, explaining
that templates are always nice because you can validate that templates actu-
ally work nicely beforehand, and then people can just use it without having to
analyse if the template is good.
Expert 2 expressed scepticism regarding the use of LLMs for requirements
validation, stating, “I think it’s a bad idea to use the prompt engineering for
validation.” They argued that LLMs lack the capability to determine whether a
system is correct, making them unsuitable for requirements validation. Addition-

--- Page 12 ---
12 Ronanki et al.
ally, Expert 3 highlighted a fundamental challenge in using LLMs for validation,
noting that validation is the final stage of the requirements process. They ex-
pressed uncertainty about whether current LLMs possess the necessary accuracy
to process the substantial amount of technical information that systems typically
require at this stage of development.
Requirements ManagementExperts 2 and 3 identified potential advantages
of keyword-based guidelines, particularly in their ability to assist with sorting
and classifying requirements into categories. Expert 3 further suggested that
these guidelines could support additional requirements management tasks, such
as similarity analysis and traceability.
Expert 1 focused on the role of keywords in providing context, explaining
that they could help establish assumptions and enhance the precision of LLM-
generated outputs. However, they also highlighted a key limitation, noting that
increased precision could “limit the scope out of which the output can come” po-
tentially excluding important aspects from consideration. They also pointed to a
broader advantage of structured reasoning within LLMs, emphasising that “you
get much better traceability or track why a certain decision has been made by
the LLM or why a certain output was generated.” This suggests that structured
guidelines could enhance transparency in LLM-driven requirements analysis. Ex-
pert 3 questioned whether keywords alone would be sufficient for requirements
management tasks, as these tasks often require in-depth project and domain
knowledge.
4.3 RE Activities and Applicable Guidelines
TheproposedmappingbetweenREactivitiesandtheidentifiedguidelinethemes,
along with the corresponding justifications, is outlined in this section. A detailed
representation of this mapping is provided in Table 4.
RE Phase Applicable Guidelines
Elicitation Context, Template, Keyword
Analysis Template, Analysis, Reasoning
Specification Persona, Disambiguation
Validation Persona, Template
Management Keyword, Reasoning
T able 4.Mapping of Guidelines and RE
We believe the users performing requirements elicitation using LLMs can
benefit from employing guidelines categorised under the “context”, “template”
and “keyword” themes, presented in Table 3. This mapping was done based on
the experts’ insights presented in detail within subsection 4.2.

--- Page 13 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13
For requirements analysis, the “template”, “analysis” and “reasoning” guide-
lines can be useful. Guidelines such as “self-consistency” Wang et al. [2022a]
and “best of three strategy” Ronanki et al. [2024a] can help in improving the
consistency of the LLM output, which was a major limitation mentioned by the
experts related to requirements analysis. The reasoning guidelines such as chain-
of-thought and tree-of-thought can help in improving the reasoning capabilities
of the LLMs, which is another limitation emphasised by the experts within this
phase.
For users performing requirements specification using LLMs can benefit from
using “Persona” and “Disambiguation” templates. The primary reason is elim-
inate and reduce ambiguities present within requirements specifications as per
the experts’ opinions.
For requirements validation using LLMs, “persona” guidelines can be helpful
for validating requirements against the needs of specific user types. The “tem-
plate” guidelines can help in having some predefined approaches which saves
time by reducing the need for experimenting with finding optimal prompts for
particular use cases.
Finally, for users performing requirements management tasks using LLMs,
“keyword” and “reasoning” guidelines can be most helpful. Keyword guidelines
can help put the task being performed into appropriate contexts by establish-
ing the right assumptions. The need for traceability and and reasoning can be
addressed by following “reasoning” guidelines while prompting LLMs.
5 Discussion
One of the main objectives of this study was to explore how existing prompt
engineering guidelines can help users in leveraging LLMs in RE activities. Our
findings indicate that while various guidelines exist, they originate from a diverse
range of models, including text-to-text models such as GPT-3.5 and BERT, as
well as text-to-image and multi-modal models like DALL-E and the combination
of CLIP and VQGAN. Although some guidelines exhibit overlap, our analysis
reveals notable differences, suggesting that the role of prompt engineering will
continue to grow in importance. Notably, the majority of guidelines identified
through our literature review were mentioned only once across studies. This
shows that, while there is much interest in improving the performance of the
LLM through coming up various prompt based approaches, this field of study is
still in its early stages and needs to mature before this becomes an established
discipline of study. The guidelines and techniques need to be validated across
broaderrangeofusecasestoreachageneralisableconclusiononwhichtechniques
work reliably enough for which tasks and use cases and what are the constraints
and limitations of them.
We also examined how these guidelines apply to different RE activities by
mapping them to guideline themes. Our interviews confirmed that while multiple
interpretations of these mappings exist, there was general agreement on the
value of the guideline themes. The template theme guidelines seems to the most

--- Page 14 ---
14 Ronanki et al.
relevant ones, as they are mapped to three of the five RE activities. The keyword,
persona and reasoning theme guidelines were mapped to two activities each
while the context, analysis and disambiguation themes were only mapped to
one activity. However, based on the experts’ insights, while the context and
disambiguation guidelines are applicable to fewer use cases, they bring more
value to the use cases they are applicable to compared to the rest of the guideline
themes. This indicates that the prompt engineering guidelines can serve two
major purposes: broadly apply to various RE activities and bring value to the
tasks they are used within.
Another interesting observation is that these seven themes of prompt engi-
neering guidelines make up 72% of the all the prompt engineering guidelines we
found. Some guidelines, such as those focused on few-shot prompting and word-
ing which make up 28% of all the prompt engineering guidelines we found in our
literature, were deemed irrelevant to RE and were not part of the mapping. This
indicates that, while existing prompt engineering guidelines are fairly applicable
to RE activities, there is also a risk that a good chunk of them are not. This
points to the need for either developing new prompt engineering guidelines, spe-
cific to RE or fine-tuning existing guidelines to make them more applicable and
effective for RE. Overall, our findings show both the potential and limitations
of prompt engineering guidelines for using LLMs in RE. Providing context is
key to improving LLM performance, but more research is needed to refine these
guidelines and explore their use in more advanced RE activities.
5.1 Threats to Validity
While we followed established methods and techniques for the collection and
analysis of the data to ensure methodological rigour and soundness, it is essential
to acknowledge and address potential threats to the validity of the findings.
InternalValidity: Despiteselectingareviewperiodfrom2018tothepresent,
there is a risk of omitting relevant studies. However, as large language models
(LLMs) largely emerged after 2017, and prompt-related guidelines first appeared
in 2021, this risk is likely minimal. Limited available literature and inconsisten-
cies in terminology pose risks. Selection bias may arise from reviewing a re-
stricted set of studies. Open discussions among researchers aimed to minimise
misinterpretations.
External Validity: The study’s findings may have limited generalisabil-
ity due to its specific focus and the rapidly evolving field. Including unpublished
preprints from arXiv introduces potential bias but helps capture cutting-edge re-
search. Interviewed experts may have personal biases influencing their responses,
potentially introducing confirmation bias.
Construct Validity:The study’s inclusion and exclusion criteria may affect
the construct validity. Also, the interviewed RE experts’ varying understanding
of the terminology within the guidelines is another threat.

--- Page 15 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 15
6 Conclusion
The primary motivation to conduct and present this study was to address the
lack of domain specific prompt engineering guidelines for using LLMs, especially
within RE. To that extent, our study provided an overview of existing prompt
engineering guidelines. We examined the benefits and limitations of these guide-
lines through interviews with three RE experts. Our interviews highlighted the
usefulness of the identified guidelines, especially for the context, template, key-
words, analysis, reasoning, persona, and disambiguation guidelines for various
RE activities. Based on the insights gathered from these interviews, we proposed
a mapping for prompt engineering guidelines for different RE activities.
We believe that as LLMs become more reliable in RE activities, they could
help reduce errors, detect issues earlier in the process, and prevent costly correc-
tions later in development. This, in turn, could lower project failure rates and
improve overall efficiency in RE workflows. Our findings contribute to the im-
provement of RE practices by supporting the development of tailored prompt en-
gineering guidelines. Future work should explore how general prompt guidelines
can be adapted for specific domains like RE and whether additional fine-tuning
of these guidelines is required to make them more effective.

--- Page 16 ---
Bibliography
Waad Alhoshan, Alessio Ferrari, and Liping Zhao. Zero-shot learning for re-
quirements classification: An exploratory study. Information and Software
Technology, 159:107202, 2023a.
Waad Alhoshan, Alessio Ferrari, and Liping Zhao. Zero-shot Learning for Re-
quirements Classification: An Exploratory Study.Information and Software
Technology, 159:107202, 2023b.
AutoGPT. “Empower your digital tasks with AutoGPT”, 2025. URLhttps:
//agpt.co/. Accessed: 19/02/2025.
Bhavya Bhavya, Jinjun Xiong, and Chengxiang Zhai. Analogy generation by
prompting large language models: A case study of instructgpt.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.04186, 2022.
Brown, Tom and Mann, Benjamin and Ryder, Nick and Subbiah, Melanie and
Kaplan, Jared D and Dhariwal, Prafulla and Neelakantan, Arvind and Shyam,
Pranav and Sastry, Girish and Askell, Amanda and others. Language Models
are Few-shot Learners.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:1877–1901, 2020.
Shan Chen, Yingya Li, Sheng Lu, Hoang Van, Hugo JWL Aerts, Guergana K
Savova, and Danielle S Bitterman. Evaluation of chatgpt family of models
for biomedical reasoning and classification.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02496,
2023.
Choi, Jonathan H and Hickman, Kristin E and Monahan, Amy and Schwarcz,
Daniel. ChatGPT Goes to Law School.Available at SSRN, 2023.
Benjamin Clavié, Alexandru Ciceu, Frederick Naylor, Guillaume Soulié, and
Thomas Brightwell. Large language models in the workplace: A case
study on prompt engineering for job type classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.07142, 2023.
Daniela S. Cruzes and Tore Dybå. Research synthesis in software engineering:
A tertiary study.Information and Software Technology, 53(5):440–455, 2011.
ISSN 0950-5849. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.
2011.01.004. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S095058491100005X. Special Section on Best Papers from XP2010.
Paul Denny, Viraj Kumar, and Nasser Giacaman. Conversing with copilot: Ex-
ploring prompt engineering for solving cs1 problems using natural language.
In Proceedings of the 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science
Education V. 1, pages 1136–1142, 2023.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
James W Drisko and Tina Maschi.Content analysis. Oxford university press,
2016.

--- Page 17 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17
Katy Ilonka Gero, Vivian Liu, and Lydia Chilton. Sparks: Inspiration for science
writing using language models. InDesigning Interactive Systems Conference,
pages 1002–1019, 2022.
Yaru Hao, Zewen Chi, Li Dong, and Furu Wei. Optimizing prompts for text-to-
image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09611, 2022.
Haque, Mubin Ul and Dharmadasa, Isuru and Sworna, Zarrin Tasnim and Ra-
japakse, Roshan Namal and Ahmad, Hussain. "I think this is the most dis-
ruptive technology": Exploring Sentiments of ChatGPT Early Adopters using
Twitter Data.arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05856, 2022.
Barbara Kitchenham and Stuart Charters. Guidelines for performing systematic
literature reviews in software engineering. 2, 01 2007.
Philipp Koralus and Vincent Wang-Maścianica. Humans in humans out: On gpt
converging toward common sense in both success and failure.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.17276, 2023.
Krishna Kumar. Geotechnical parrot tales (gpt): Harnessing large language
models in geotechnical engineering.arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2304, 2023.
Vivian Liu and Lydia B Chilton. Design Guidelines for Prompt Engineering
Text-to-Image Generative Models. InProceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’22, New York, NY, USA,
2022a. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450391573.https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501825. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3491102.3501825.
Vivian Liu and Lydia B Chilton. Design guidelines for prompt engineering text-
to-image generative models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–23, 2022b.
Tiago Lubiana, Rafael Lopes, Pedro Medeiros, Juan Carlo Silva, Andre Nico-
lau Aquime Goncalves, Vinicius Maracaja-Coutinho, and Helder I Nakaya.
Ten quick tips for harnessing the power of chatgpt/gpt-4 in computational
biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16429, 2023.
Zheheng Luo, Qianqian Xie, and Sophia Ananiadou. Chatgpt as a factual
inconsistency evaluator for abstractive text summarization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.15621, 2023.
Jonas Oppenlaender, Rhema Linder, and Johanna Silvennoinen. Prompting ai
art: An investigation into the creative skill of prompt engineering. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.13534, 2023.
Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. True Few-shot Learning with
Language Models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:
11054–11070, 2021.
Roger S Pressman. Software engineering: a practitioner’s approach.Pressman
and Associates, 2005.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Im-
proving language understanding by generative pre-training. 2018.
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. Prompt programming for large language
models: Beyond the few-shot paradigm. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–7, 2021.

--- Page 18 ---
18 Ronanki et al.
Robson, Colin. Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientists and
Practitioner-Researchers. Blackwell, 1993. URL https://cir.nii.ac.jp/
crid/1130282271686871424.
Alberto D. Rodriguez, Katherine R. Dearstyne, and Jane Cleland-Huang.
Prompts matter: Insights and strategies for prompt engineering in auto-
mated software traceability. In2023 IEEE 31st International Requirements
Engineering Conference Workshops (REW), pages 455–464, 2023. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/REW57809.2023.00087.
Krishna Ronanki, Beatriz Cabrero-Daniel, and Christian Berger. Chatgpt
as a tool for user story quality evaluation: Trustworthy out of the box? InAgile
Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming – Workshops,
pages 173–181. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024a. ISBN 978-3-031-48550-3.
Krishna Ronanki, Beatriz Cabrero-Daniel, Jennifer Horkoff, and Christian
Berger. Requirements Engineering Using Generative AI: Prompts and
Prompting Patterns, pages 109–127. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham,
2024b. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55642-5_5. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-55642-5_5.
Yuya Sasaki, Hironori Washizaki, Jialong Li, Dominik Sander, Nobukazu Yosh-
ioka, and Yoshiaki Fukazawa. Systematic literature review of prompt engineer-
ing patterns in software engineering. In2024 IEEE 48th Annual Computers,
Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), pages 670–675, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC61105.2024.00096.
Seaman,C.B. QualitativeMethodsinEmpiricalStudiesofSoftwareEngineering.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 25(4):557–572, 1999. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/32.799955.
Ian Sommerville and Pete Sawyer.Requirements Engineering: A Good Practice
Guide. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1st edition, 1997. ISBN 0471974447.
Strandberg, Per Erik. Ethical Interviews in Software Engineering. In 2019
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement (ESEM), pages 1–11, 2019.https://doi.org/10.1109/ESEM.
2019.8870192.
Dietrich Trautmann, Alina Petrova, and Frank Schilder. Legal prompt
engineering for multilingual legal judgement prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.02199, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you
need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Andreas Vogelsang. From specifications to prompts: On the future of generative
large language models in requirements engineering. IEEE Software, 41(5):
9–13, 2024.https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2024.3410712.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang,
Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain
of thought reasoning in language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171,
2022a.

--- Page 19 ---
Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny
Zhou. Rationale-augmented ensembles in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.00747, 2022b.
Jing Wei, Sungdong Kim, Hyunhoon Jung, and Young-Ho Kim. Leveraging large
language models to power chatbots for collecting user self-reported data.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2301.05843, 2023.
Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena D Hwang, Liwei Jiang,
RonanLeBras,XimingLu,SeanWelleck,andYejinChoi. Symbolicknowledge
distillation: from general language models to commonsense models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.07178, 2021.
Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea, Henry
Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C Schmidt. A
prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023a.
Jules White, Quchen Fu, Sam Hays, Michael Sandborn, Carlos Olea, Henry
Gilbert, Ashraf Elnashar, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C. Schmidt. A
Prompt Pattern Catalog to Enhance Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT,
2023b.
Jules White, Sam Hays, Quchen Fu, Jesse Spencer-Smith, and Douglas C
Schmidt. Chatgpt prompt patterns for improving code quality, refactoring, re-
quirements elicitation, and software design.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07839,
2023c.
Kailai Yang, Shaoxiong Ji, Tianlin Zhang, Qianqian Xie, and Sophia Ananiadou.
On the evaluations of chatgpt and emotion-enhanced prompting for mental
health analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03347, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao,
and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with
large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36, 2024.
Gunwoo Yong, Kahyun Jeon, Daeyoung Gil, and Ghang Lee. Prompt engi-
neering for zero-shot and few-shot defect detection and classification using a
visual-language pretrained model. Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering, 2022.
Fangyi Yu, Lee Quartey, and Frank Schilder. Legal prompting: Teaching a lan-
guage model to think like a lawyer.arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01326, 2022.
Zhao, Liping and Alhoshan, Waad and Ferrari, Alessio and Letsholo, Keletso J
and Ajagbe, Muideen A and Chioasca, Erol-Valeriu and Batista-Navarro, Riza
T. Natural Language Processing for Requirements Engineering: A Systematic
Mapping Study. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(3):1–41, 2021.
Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Learning to
promptforvision-languagemodels. International Journal of Computer Vision,
130(9):2337–2348, 2022a.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis,
Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt
engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910, 2022b.